# CCNP_SCOR 350-701 Official Cert Guide
---
---
## 01 Cybersecurity Fundamentals
- A *`threat`* is any potential danger to an asset. If a vulnerability exists but has not yet been exploited—or, more importantly, it is not yet publicly known—the threat is latent and not yet realized. If someone is actively launching an attack against your system and successfully accesses something or compromises your security against an asset, the threat is realized. The entity that takes advantage of the vulnerability is known as the `malicious actor`, and the path used by this actor to perform the attack is known as the `threat agent` or `threat vector`.
---
- A *`vulnerability`* is a weakness in the system design, implementation, software, or code, or the lack of a mechanism. A specific vulnerability might manifest as anything from a weakness in system design to the implementation of an operational procedure. The correct implementation of safeguards and security countermeasures could mitigate a vulnerability and reduce the risk of exploitation. Vulnerabilities and weaknesses are common, mainly because there isn’t any perfect software or code in existence. Some vulnerabilities have limited impact and are easily mitigated; however, many have broader implications.
  - Vulnerabilities can be found in each of the following: Applications, Operating systems, Hardware, Misconfiguration, Shrinkwrap software 
---
- An *`exploit`* refers to a piece of software, a tool, a technique, or a process that takes advantage of a vulnerability that leads to access, privilege escalation, loss of integrity, or denial of service on a computer system. The more critical the server, the slower it is usually patched. Management might be afraid of interrupting the server or afraid that the patch might affect stability or performance. Finally, the time required to deploy and install the software patch on production servers and workstations exposes an organization’s IT infrastructure to an additional period of risk.
  - There is a command-line tool called `searchsploit` that allows you to download a copy of the Exploit Database so that you can use it on the go.
---
- *`Risk`* is the probability or likelihood of the occurrence or realization of a threat. There are three basic elements of risk: `assets`, `threats`, and `vulnerabilities`. To deal with risk, the U.S. federal government has adopted a `risk management framework (RMF)`. The RMF process is based on the key concepts of `mission-` and `risk-based`, `cost-effective`, and enterprise information system security.
---
- An `asset` is any item of economic value owned by an individual or corporation. Assets can be real—such as routers, servers, hard drives, and laptops—or assets can be virtual, such as formulas, databases, spreadsheets, trade secrets, and processing time. Regardless of the type of asset discussed, if the asset is lost, damaged, or compromised, there can be an economic cost to the organization.

- *`NOTE:-`* No organization can ever be 100 percent secure. There will always be some risk left over. This is known as residual risk, which is the amount of risk left after safeguards and controls have been put in place to protect the asset.
---
- *`Threat intelligence`* is referred to as the information about the observables, indicators of compromise (`IoCs`) intent, and capabilities of internal and external threat actors and their attacks. Threat intelligence includes specifics on the tactics, techniques, and procedures of these adversaries. Threat intelligence’s primary purpose is to inform business decisions regarding the risks and implications associated with threats.
  - Converting these definitions into common language could translate to threat intelligence being evidence-based knowledge of the capabilities of internal and external threat actors. 
  - *`TIP:-`* The following GitHub repository includes thousands of references and resources related to threat intelligence, threat hunting, ethical hacking, penetration testing, digital forensics, incident response, vulnerability research, exploit development, reverse engineering, and more: https://github.com/The-Art-of-Hacking/h4cker
---
- *`Viruses and Worms`* - `Viruses` require some type of human interaction. A `worm` can travel from system to system without human interaction. When a worm executes, it can replicate again and infect even more systems. That massive amount of traffic can lead to a denial of service very quickly.
  - `Spyware` - Spyware steals information from the user and also eats up bandwidth. If that’s not enough, spyware can also redirect your web traffic and flood you with annoying pop-ups. Many users view spyware as another type of virus. 
  - *`Types and Transmission Methods`* - Viruses require human activity, such as booting a computer, executing an autorun on digital media (for example, CD, DVD, USB sticks, external hard drives, and so on), or opening an email attachment. Malware propagates through the computer world in several basic ways: Master boot record infection, BIOS infection, File infection, Macro infection, Cluster, Multipartite.

  - After your computer is infected, the malware can do any number of things. Some spread quickly. This type of virus is known as a fast infection. Fast-infection viruses infect any file that they are capable of infecting. Others limit the rate of infection. This type of activity is known as sparse infection. Sparse infection means that the virus takes its time in infecting other files or spreading its damage. This technique is used to try to help the virus avoid infection. Some viruses forgo a life of living exclusively in files and load themselves into RAM, which is the only way that boot sector viruses can spread.

  - As the antivirus and security companies have developed better ways to detect malware, malware authors have fought back by trying to develop malware that is harder to detect. For example, in 2012, `Flame` was believed to be the most sophisticated malware to date. Flame has the ability to spread to other systems over a local network. It can record audio, screenshots, and keyboard activity, and it can turn infected computers into Bluetooth beacons that attempt to download contact information from nearby Bluetooth-enabled devices. 
    - Another technique that malware developers have attempted is `polymorphism`. A polymorphic virus can change its signature every time it replicates and infects a new file. This technique makes it much harder for the antivirus program to detect it. One of the biggest changes is that malware creators don’t massively spread viruses and other malware the way they used to. Much of the malware today is written for a specific target. By limiting the spread of the malware and targeting only a few victims, malware developers make finding out about the malware and creating a signature to detect it much harder for antivirus companies.

  - When is a virus not a virus? When is the virus just a hoax? A virus hoax is nothing more than a chain letter, meme, or email that encourages you to forward it to your friends to warn them of impending doom or some other notable event. To convince readers to forward the hoax, the email will contain some official-sounding information that could be mistaken as valid.
  
  - *`Malware Payloads`* - Malware must place their payload somewhere. They can always overwrite a portion of the infected file, but to do so would destroy it. Most malware writers want to avoid detection for as long as possible and might not have written the program to immediately destroy files. One way the malware writer can accomplish this is to place the malware code either at the beginning or the end of the infected file. 
    - Malware known as a `prepender` infects programs by placing its viral code at the beginning of the infected file, whereas an `appender` places its code at the end of the infected file. Both techniques leave the file intact, with the malicious code added to the beginning or the end of the file.
  - No matter the infection technique, all viruses have some basic common components, as detailed in the following list. For example: Search routine, Infection routine, Payloads, Antidetection routine & Trigger routine.
---
- *`Trojans`* -Trojans are programs that pretend to do one thing but, when loaded, actually perform another, more malicious act. A user might think that a file looks harmless and is safe to run, but after the file is executed, it delivers a malicious payload. Trojans work because they typically present themselves as something you want, such as an `email with a PDF`, a `Word document`, or an `Excel spreadsheet`. 
  - Trojans work hard to hide their true purposes. The spoofed email might look like it’s from HR, and the attached file might purport to be a list of pending layoffs. The payload is executed if the attacker can get the victim to open the file or click the attachment. That payload might allow a hacker remote access to your system, start a keystroke logger to record your every keystroke, plant a backdoor on your system, cause a denial of service (DoS), or even disable your antivirus protection or software firewall. Unlike a virus or worm, Trojans cannot spread themselves. They rely on the uninformed user.

- *`Trojan Types`* - A few Trojan categories are command-shell Trojans, graphical user interface (GUI) Trojans, HTTP/HTTPS Trojans, document Trojans, defacement Trojans, botnet Trojans, Virtual Network Computing (VNC) Trojans, remote-access Trojans, data-hiding Trojans, banking Trojans, DoS Trojans, FTP Trojans, software-disabling Trojans, and covert-channel Trojans. 
  - In reality, it’s hard to place some Trojans into a single type because many have more than one function.
  - `Remote-access Trojans (RATs):-` It allow the attacker full control over the system. Remote-access Trojans are usually set up as client/server programs so that the attacker can connect to the infected system and control it remotely.
  -  `Ransomware/Data hiding:-` This type of Trojan restricts access to the computer system that it infects, and it demands a ransom paid to the creator of the malware for the restriction to be removed.
  - `E-banking:-` These Trojans intercept and use a victim’s banking information for financial gain. Usually, they function as a transaction authorization number (TAN) grabber, use HTML injection, or act as a form grabber. The sole purpose of these types of programs is financial gain.
  - `Denial of service (DoS):-` They can be designed to knock out a specific service or to bring an entire system offline.
  - `Proxy:-` These Trojans are designed to work as proxy programs that help a hacker hide and allow him to perform activities from the victim’s computer, not his own. After all, the farther away the hacker is from the crime, the harder it becomes to trace him.
  - `FTP [Port 21]:-` They allow the hacker or others to upload, download, or move files at will on the victim’s machine.
  - `Security-software disablers:-` These Trojans are designed to attack and kill antivirus or software firewalls. The goal of disabling these programs is to make it easier for the hacker to control the system.
- *`Trojan Ports and Communication Methods`* - These programs make no attempt to hide the transmission of data as it is moved on to or off of the victim’s computer. Most use `covert communication channels`. This means that the hacker goes to lengths to hide the transmission of data to and from the victim. Many Trojans that open covert channels also function as backdoors. 
  - A backdoor is any type of program that will allow a hacker to connect to a computer without going through the normal authentication process. If a hacker can get a backdoor program loaded on an internal device, the hacker can then come and go at will. Some of the programs spawn a connection on the victim’s computer connecting out to the hacker. The danger of this type of attack is the traffic moving from the inside out, which means from inside the organization to the outside Internet. This is usually the least restrictive because companies are usually more concerned about what comes in the network than they are about what leaves the network.
  - *`TIP`* -  One way an attacker can spread a Trojan is through a poison apple attack or USB key drop. Using this technique, the attacker leaves a thumb drive (USB stick) in the desk drawer of the victim or maybe in the cafeteria of the targeted company, perhaps in a key chain along with some keys and a photo of a cat to introduce a personal touch. The attacker then waits for someone to find it, insert it in the computer, and start clicking on files to see what’s there. Instead of just one bite of the apple, it’s just one click, and the damage is done!

- *`Trojan Goals`* - Not all Trojans were designed for the same purpose. Some are destructive and can destroy computer systems, whereas others seek only to steal specific pieces of information. Although not all of them make their presence known, Trojans are still dangerous because they represent a loss of `confidentiality`, `integrity`, and `availability`. Common targets of Trojans include the following: `Credit card data`, `Electronic or digital wallets`, `Passwords` and below:
  - `Insider information:-` We have all had those moments in which we have said, “If only I had known this beforehand.” That’s what insider information is about. It can give the hacker critical information before it is made public or released.
  - `Data storage:-` The goal of the Trojan might be nothing more than to use your system for storage space. That data could be movies, music, illegal software (warez), or even pornography
  - `Advanced persistent threat (APT):-` It could be that the hacker has targeted you as part of a nation-state attack or your company has been targeted because of its sensitive data.

- *`Trojan Infection Mechanisms`* - After a hacker has written a Trojan, he will still need to spread it. The Internet has made this much easier than it used to be. There are a variety of ways to spread malware, including the following:
  - `Peer-to-peer networks (P2P):-` Although users might think that they are getting the latest copy of a tool/app, in reality, they might be getting much more.
  - `Instant messaging (IM):-` IM was not built with security controls. So, you never know the real contents of a file or program that someone has sent you. IM users are at great risk of becoming targets for Trojans and other types of malware.
  - `Internet Relay Chat (IRC):-` IRC is full of individuals ready to attack the newbies who are enticed into downloading a free program or application.
  - `Email attachments:-` Hackers might disguise the message to appear to be from a legitimate organization. The message might also offer you a valuable prize, a desired piece of software, or similar enticement to pique your interest. If you feel that you must investigate these attachments, save them first and then run an antivirus on them. Email attachments are the number-one means of malware propagation.
  - `Physical access:-` If a hacker has physical access to a victim’s system, he can just copy the Trojan horse to the hard drive (via a thumb drive). The hacker can even take the attack to the next level by creating a Trojan that is unique to the system or network. It might be a fake login screen that looks like the real one or even a fake database.
  - `Browser and browser extension vulnerabilities:-` Web browsers often treat the content they receive as trusted. The truth is that nothing in a web page can be trusted to follow any guidelines. A website can send to your browser data that exploits a bug in a browser, violates computer security, and might load a Trojan.
  - `SMS messages:-` SMS messages have been used by attackers to propagate malware to mobile devices and to perform other scams.
  - `Impersonated mobile apps:-` Attackers can impersonate apps in mobile stores (for example, Google Play or Apple Store) to infect users. Attackers can perform visual impersonation to intentionally misrepresents apps in the eyes of the user. Attackers can do this to repackage the application and republish the app to the marketplace under a different author. This tactic has been used by attackers to take a paid app and republish it to the marketplace for less than its original price. If the attacker repackages a popular app and appends malware to it, the attacker can leverage the user’s trust of their favorite apps and successfully compromise the mobile device.
  - `Watering hole:-` The idea is to infect a website the attacker knows the victim will visit. Then the attacker simply waits for the victim to visit the watering hole site so the system can become infected.
  - `Freeware:-` Nothing in life is free, and that includes most software. Users are taking a big risk when they download freeware from an unknown source. Not only might the freeware contain a Trojan, but freeware also has become a favorite target for adware and spyware.
  - *`TIP`* Be sure that you understand that email is one of the most widely used forms of malware propagation.

- *`Effects of Trojans`* - The effects of Trojans can range from the benign to the extreme. Individuals whose systems become infected might never even know; most of the creators of this category of malware don’t want to be detected, so they go to great lengths to hide their activity and keep their actions hidden. 
  - After all, their goal is typically to “own the box.” If the victim becomes aware of the Trojan’s presence, the victim will take countermeasures that threaten the attacker’s ability to keep control of the computer. 
  - In some cases, programs seemingly open by themselves or the web browser opens pages the user didn’t request. However, because the hacker is in control of the computer, he can change its background, reboot the systems, or capture everything the victim types on the keyboard.
---
- *`Distributing Malware`* - As technology changes, the malware detection also much more difficult today than in the past. Today, it is not uncommon for attackers to use multiple layers of techniques to obfuscate code, make malicious code undetectable from antivirus, and employ encryption to prevent others from examining malware. 
- The result is that modern malware improves the attacker's chances of compromising a computer without being detected. These techniques include wrappers, packers, droppers, and crypters.
  - `Wrappers:-` A wrapper is a program used to combine two or more executables into a single packaged program. Wrappers are also referred to as `binders`, `packagers`, and `EXE binders` because they are the functional equivalent of binders for Windows Portable Executable files. Some wrappers only allow programs to be joined; others allow the binding together of three, four, five, or more programs. Basically, these programs perform like installation builders and setup programs. Besides allowing you to bind a program, wrappers add additional layers of obfuscation and encryption around the target file, essentially creating a new executable file.

  - `Packers:-` Packers are similar to programs such as `WinZip`, `Rar`, and `Tar` because they compress files. However, whereas compression programs compress files to save space, packers do this to obfuscate the activity of the malware. The idea is to prevent anyone from viewing the malware’s code until it is placed in memory. Packers serve a second valuable goal to the attacker in that they work to bypass network security protection mechanisms, such as hostand network-based intrusion detection systems. The malware packer will decompress the program only when in memory, revealing the program’s original code only when executed. This is yet another attempt to bypass antimalware detection.

  - `Droppers:-` Droppers are software designed to install malware payloads on the victim’s system. Droppers try to avoid detection and evade security controls by using several methods to spread and install the malware payload. 

  - `Crypters:-` Crypters function to encrypt or obscure the code. Some crypters obscure the contents of the Trojan by applying an encryption algorithm. Crypters can use anything from `AES`, `RSA`, to even `Blowfish`, or might use more basic obfuscation techniques such as `XOR`, `Base64 encoding`, or even `ROT13`. Again, 
  
  - these techniques are used to conceal the contents of the executable program, making it undetectable by antivirus and resistant to reverse-engineering efforts.

---
- *`Covert Communication`* - Distributing malware is just half the battle for the attacker. The attacker will need to have some way to exfiltrate data and to do so in a way that is not detected. If you look at the history of covert communications, you will see that the `Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC)` was one of the first documents to fully examine the concept of covert communications and attacks. TCSEC divides covert channel attacks into two broad categories:
  - `*Covert timing channel attacks:-*` Timing attacks are difficult to detect because they are based on system times and function by altering a component or by modifying resource timing.
  - `*Covert storage channel attacks:-*` Use one process to write data to a storage area and another process to read the data.

- In the world of hacking, covert communication is accomplished through a covert channel. A covert channel is a way of moving information through a communication channel or protocol in a manner in which it was not intended to be used. Covert channels are important for security professionals to understand. 
  - For the ethical hacker who performs attack and penetration assessments, such tools are important because hackers can use them to obtain an initial foothold into an otherwise secure network. 
  - For the network administrator, understanding how these tools work and their fingerprints can help her recognize potential entry points into the network. For the hacker, these are powerful tools that can potentially allow him control and access.

- How do covert communications work? Well, the design of TCP/IP offers many opportunities for misuse. The primary protocols for covert communications include Internet Protocol (`IP`), Transmission Control Protocol (`TCP`), User Datagram Protocol (`UDP`), Internet Control Message Protocol (`ICMP`), and Domain Name Service (`DNS`). The Internet layer offers several opportunities for hackers to tunnel traffic. Two commonly tunneled protocols are `IPv6` and `ICMP`.

- *`IPv6`* is like all protocols in that it can be abused or manipulated to act as a covert channel. This is primarily possible because edge devices might not be configured to recognize IPv6 traffic even though most operating systems have support for IPv6 turned on. According to US-CERT, Windows misuse relies on several factors:
  - Incomplete or inconsistent support for IPv6
  - The IPv6 auto-configuration capability
  - Malware designed to enable IPv6 support on susceptible hosts
  - Malicious application of traffic “tunneling,” a method of Internet data transmission in

- which the public Internet is used to relay private network data There are plenty of tools to tunnel over IPv6, including `6tunnel`, `socat`, `nt6tunnel`, and `relay6`. The best way to maintain security with IPv6 is to recognize that even devices supporting IPv6 may not be able to correctly analyze the IPv6 encapsulation of IPv4 packets.

- The second protocol that might be tunneled at the Internet layer is *`Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP)`*. ICMP is specified by RFC 792 and is designed to provide error messaging, best path information, and diagnostic messages (Ex:- ping command).

- The `transport layer` offers attackers two protocols to use: *`TCP`* and *`UDP`*. TCP offers several fields that can be manipulated by an attacker, including the TCP Options field in the TCP header and the TCP Flag field. By design, TCP is a connection-oriented protocol that provides robust communication. The following steps outline the normal TCP process:
  1. `A three-step handshake:` This ensures that both systems are ready to communicate.
  2. `Exchange of control information:` During the setup, information is exchanged that specifies maximum segment size
  3. `Sequence numbers:` This indicates the amount and position of data being sent.
  4. `Acknowledgments:` This indicates the next byte of data that is expected.
  5. `Four-step shutdown:` This is a formal process of ending the session that allows for an orderly shutdown. 

- Although `SYN packets` occur only at the beginning of the session, `ACKs` may occur thousands of times. They confirm that data was received. That is why packet-filtering devices build their rules on `SYN segments`. 
  - It is an assumption on the firewall administrator’s part that ACKs occur only as part of an established session. It is much easier to configure, and it reduces workload. To bypass the SYN blocking rule, a hacker may attempt to use `TCP ACK packets` as a covert communication channel. Tools such as `AckCmd` serve this exact purpose.

- UDP is stateless and, as such, may not be logged in firewall connections; some UDP based applications such as `DNS` are typically allowed through the firewall and might not be watched closely by network and firewall administrators. UDP tunneling applications typically act in a client/server configuration. Also, some ports like `UDP 53` are most likely open. This means it’s also open for attackers to use as a potential means to exfiltrate data. There are several UDP tunnel tools that you should check out, including the following:
  - `UDP Tunnel:` Also designed to tunnel TCP traffic over a UDP connection. You can find UDP Tunnel at https://code.google.com/p/udptunnel/.
  - `dnscat:` Another option for tunneling data over an open DNS connection. You can download the current version, dnscat2, at https://github.com/iagox86/dnscat2.

- Application layer tunneling uses common applications that send data on allowed ports. For example, a hacker might tunnel a web session, port 80, through SSH port 22 or even through port 443. Because ports 22 and 443 both use encryption, it can be difficult to monitor the difference between a legitimate session and a covert channel.

- HTTP might also be used. *`Netcat`* is one tool that can be used to set up a tunnel to exfiltrate data over HTTP. If HTTPS is the transport, it is difficult for the network administrator to inspect the outbound data. `Cryptcat` (http://cryptcat.sourceforge.net) can be used to send data over HTTPS.

- Finally, even *`Domain Name System (DNS)`* can be used for application layer tunneling. DNS is a request/reply protocol. Its queries consist of a 12-byte fixed-size header followed by one or more questions. A DNS response is formatted in much the same way in that it has a header, followed by the original question, and then typically a single-answer resource record. 
  - The most straightforward way to manipulate DNS is by means of these request/replies. You can easily detect a spike in DNS traffic; however, many times attackers move data using DNS without being detected for days, weeks, or months. They schedule the DNS exfiltration packets in a way that makes it harder for a security analyst or automated tools to detect.

---
- *`Keyloggers`* - 
<!-- Page No 28 -->